Now it's all nice
what we learned
but there is one super important thing about observables and the RxJS library that you absolutely have
to know
and that would be operators.
Operators are the magic feature of the RxJS library and they are the thing that really turn observable
into awesome constructs.
If we have an observable and an observer, we of course get data and we listen to that with a subscription,
that is what you learned.
Now however, sometimes you don't need the raw data, You might want to transform it or filter out certain
data points
and of course, you could do all of that inside of your subscription or in the function you pass to your
subscription
but there's a more elegant way. Instead of setting up that subscription like this, you can use built-in
operators in between.
That means that the data points first of all reach these operators that do something to the data and
that something can be anything,
there are tons of built-in operators
and then you subscribe to the result of these operators.
Now let me show you a concrete example that makes that clearer. Let's say here in our application, we
of course get our values - 0, 1, 2, 3
before we get an error and let's say I'm not interested in these values but I want to have some text
that says something like, round one, round two, round three and so on.
So in the end, I want to use that count add one and add the word round in front of it.
Now obviously what we can do is we can simply log round plus data plus one here, add extra parentheses
around that so that it is really used as a calculation
and if we do that, we see Round 1, 2, 3 and so on being logged here.
Now nothing wrong with that
and for simple transformations like this one of course, that makes sense
but the more complex your logic gets, the nicer it might be to not care about that here in the place
where you subscribe
but in an earlier place.
So here, I'll revert this to just logging the data and I want to change the format in which that data
arrives.
Now obviously, we could do that directly here where we create our observable but what if you don't own
the observable? What if you wanted to change the route params for example? You can't change the original
code
and that is where operators are important.
You can use them on any observable, like our custom interval observable, by calling a method called pipe.
Now every observable has a pipe method, the pipe method is built into RxJS.
Now you can import observables, not from the RxJS package but from rxjs/operators and there
are tons of built-in operators, like the map operator which is one of the operators you'll use more often.
As a side note, if you want to learn more about RxJS and operators and so on, you can visit my home
page, academind.com and there on the Learn Javascript,
you'll find a complete series on RxJS which introduces you to RxJS and to operators
as well.
It uses a slightly older syntax, RxJS was changed in the meantime, which I'll by the way also cover
on my page, here in RxJS 6, what changed but the core idea and the explanation about these operators
still applies and
that can be very useful for learning more about RxJS but that's just a side note, back to our
code here.
So we have that pipe method and we're importing map here and map
as I mentioned is one of the more important operators.
Now we simply call map as a function inside of pipe here and map in turn takes a function as an argument,
so an anonymous function here if you want. That however gets an argument, that anonymous function gets
an argument and that is the data you would otherwise get here in your first subscribed callback,
so in that first function you pass to subscribe.
It's the current data of your observable that's being emitted by that observable.
So we get that data here and in map, we now have to return new data, that can of course be the unchanged
old data in which case that map operator is totally useless but it can also be transformed data,
like for example round plus data plus one,
so what we previously did right in console log,
now we're doing it here.
We just have to be clear about the format of data here as it seems,
you can of course do that by wrapping data in parentheses here, in the argument list, adding a colon after
it and making it clear that this will be a number
and now if you save that, it will compile
but what you'll see your project now is still the old output.
The reason for that is, let's wait for this to complete,
the reason for that is that this is applied but we still subscribe to this observable and this does
not change the data inside of the observable,
instead it only changes the data we get after pipe.
So what we would have to do here is simply we have to take that and replace our observable here with
it,
so the concrete observable we're subscribing to. Now if we do that,
so if we have our observable, then we pipe the data, so we add a couple of operators, in this case the
map operator,
then when we subscribe thereafter, we'll get that mapped,
so that changed data.
And now when we save this, we'll see that we get round one, two, three and so on.
So this is the map operator and again just as before, this is kind of a constructed example here, it is
of course more useful for example if you're fetching complex data from a web server and you want to
transform that data before you use it in a component
and that is something we'll do later too
but the core idea is the same, with pipe,
we can add one or more operators, if you have more than one,
you simply add them as arguments here to the pipe method,
so the pipe method takes an unlimited amount of arguments and each argument would be an operator imported
from rxjs/operators and you can add as many as you want and they will execute after each other
and do different kinds of stuff on the data.
This is map, of course for example you could also filter. That's another operator indeed, so let's use
that just to demonstrate one more.
Now there are dozens by the way, besides using my page here,
you can also visit learnrxjs.io where you find a long list of the operators with examples,
so that's really useful
but back to our code. Now let's dive into filter and if we wanted to add that too, we would simply add
it here separated by a comma in front of map as an extra argument here and filter also gets the
data of course
and inside of that anonymous function which we pass to filter, where we do get that data, we now have
to return true or false which decides whether that data point will continue in that chain,
so whether it will reach map and thereafter, the subscription or whether it will be dropped, in which case
it will neither reach map nor the subscription.
Now of course we could hardcode true or false here but that's not too useful,
instead we could say yes return true if data is greater than zero
and that effectively means that we will return every value but the very first one and therefore
since we print round data plus one, we'll not start with Round 1, because we're dropping this zero value,
instead we'll actually start with round two because only then this condition is true. So if we now go
back to our application here, let this reload,
we see nothing but then round two, round three and so on, so round one indeed is skipped. And that shows you
hopefully the power of operators, that they allow you to build up a chain of steps you want to funnel
your observable data through, that can be really helpful when it comes to transforming data, filtering
out data and so on.